Part 1: How an image is made (the concept)
    Pixels — the basic building block
        Every digital photo/raster image is just a grid of tiny squares called pixels (picture elements). If you zoom in far enough on any photo, you'll see this grid — each square is one solid color.Photoshop EssentialsPinterestyoutube.comResults from the webThat blocky look when you zoom way in is the pixel grid becoming visible — each block is one pixel, and at normal zoom these blend together so smoothly your eye sees a continuous photo.
        How each pixel gets its color
            Each pixel stores numbers representing color, usually as three values: how much Red, Green, and Blue light to mix (RGB). Each channel typically ranges 0–255.
            (255, 0, 0) → pure red
            (0, 255, 0) → pure green
            (255, 255, 255) → white
            (0, 0, 0) → black
            (128, 0, 128) → purple
            
        A 12-megapixel photo, for example, is roughly 4000×3000 pixels — that's 12 million little dots, each one storing 3 numbers (R, G, B). That's 36 million numbers just to describe one photo's colors.
        So at its rawest, an image is just: width × height × (R, G, B values) — a giant table of numbers.

Part 2: What's actually inside the file on disk
    If image files just stored those raw numbers directly, they'd be huge (that 12MP photo would be ~36MB uncompressed). So real image files add structure and compression:
    
    1. Header / Signature
        The first few bytes identify the format so software knows how to read the rest.
            PNG starts with bytes that decode to ‰PNG
            JPEG starts with bytes FF D8 FF

    2. Metadata
        Information about the image itself:
            Width and height in pixels
            Color depth (8-bit, 16-bit, etc.)
            Color mode (RGB, grayscale, RGBA with transparency)
            EXIF data on photos — camera model, date taken, GPS location, exposure settings

    3. Compressed pixel data — the bulk of the file
        Instead of storing every pixel's raw RGB values, formats compress the data:
            JPEG (lossy): Throws away color detail the human eye barely notices, using math (DCT) to group similar regions. This is why JPEGs can look blocky/blurry if compressed too much — that detail is genuinely gone, not just hidden.
            PNG (lossless): Compresses without losing any data (like a ZIP file), so you get back the exact original pixels, but the file is usually bigger than an equivalent JPEG.
            That blocky/smudgy look in heavily-compressed JPEGs is the compression algorithm discarding detail — those little 8×8 pixel blocks become visible because nearby pixels got averaged together to save space.
    
    4. End marker / checksums
        Some formats end with a specific byte sequence signaling "this is the end of the image," and some include checksums (like PNG's CRC per chunk) so software can detect if the file got corrupted.


How raw data becomes a compressed, structured file (JPEG pipeline)
    This is the encoding process — basically the reverse of what cv2.imread does for you:
    
    Step 1 — Color space conversion: RGB → YCbCr
        Human eyes are far more sensitive to brightness (luminance) than color (chrominance). JPEG converts:
        Y = luminance (brightness)
        Cb, Cr = blue-difference and red-difference chroma
        This separation lets JPEG throw away more color detail than brightness detail without it being very noticeable.
    
    Step 2 — Chroma subsampling
        Cb and Cr channels get downsampled (commonly 4:2:0 — keeping full resolution Y, but only ¼ the resolution for Cb/Cr). This alone cuts data ~50% before any "real" compression happens.
    
    Step 3 — Block splitting
        The image is chopped into 8×8 pixel blocks per channel.
    
    Step 4 — DCT (Discrete Cosine Transform)
        Each 8×8 block of pixel values is mathematically transformed into 8×8 frequency coefficients — basically "how much low-frequency vs high-frequency detail is in this block." This isn't lossy yet, just a different representation of the same info.
    
    Step 5 — Quantization (this is where data is actually lost)
        High-frequency coefficients (fine detail) get divided down and rounded, often to zero. Low-frequency coefficients (overall block color/brightness) are kept more precise. The "quality" slider in JPEG export controls how aggressive this rounding is.
    
    Step 6 — Entropy coding (Huffman coding)
        The now mostly-zero, quantized coefficients are run-length encoded and Huffman coded — lossless compression on top of the lossy step. This is the actual bit-packing that shrinks file size further.
    
    Step 7 — Structuring into the file
        The encoder writes:
            FF D8                  ← Start Of Image marker
            FF E0 [APP0 data]      ← JFIF header (version, DPI...)
            FF DB [quantization tables]
            FF C0 [frame header: width, height, components]
            FF C4 [Huffman tables]
            FF DA [scan header] [entropy-coded bitstream...]
            FF D9                  ← End Of Image marker
        
        Each FF xx is a marker segment — this is the "structure" that lets a decoder jump to the right section and know how to interpret the bytes that follow.

PNG's approach (lossless, different strategy)

    Filtering — each row of pixels is encoded as a difference from a prediction based on neighboring pixels (e.g., "Sub" filter: store pixel - left_pixel). This doesn't shrink data yet, but makes it much more compressible (lots of small numbers/zeros instead of varied values).

    DEFLATE compression — the same algorithm ZIP uses: LZ77 (find repeated patterns) + Huffman coding. Fully reversible — no data lost.

    Chunk structure — PNG is literally built from chunks:
        89 50 4E 47 0D 0A 1A 0A   ← PNG signature
        [IHDR chunk]  ← width, height, bit depth, color type + CRC32
        [IDAT chunk]  ← the DEFLATE-compressed pixel data + CRC32
        [IEND chunk]  ← marks end of file

    Each chunk has: length (4 bytes) → type name (4 bytes, e.g. IHDR) → data → CRC checksum (4 bytes). That's why corrupting one byte inside a chunk usually causes a CRC mismatch and the decoder rejects the whole file outright — PNG actually checks integrity, unlike a raw bitstream.z


LLM don't just gets the image directly first the compressed image gets decoded to the raw data for the model , and then its feed to the model directly 